---
title: Choosing Software
date: '2025-05-16'
tags: ['soyspray']
draft: true
layout: PostBanner
images: ['/static/images/003-soyspray-series/soyspray-choosing-hardware-soy-header.jpg']
summary: 'How I chose the software for my home cluster.'
---

Before I even seriously started thinking how to install Kubernetes at home, I
already knew that I wanted to use Kubespray. This short post is just to explain
how I made that decision and why I think Kubespray is a good start.

If you search internet or YouTube for how to set up Kubernetes cluster at home, almost immediately you find two products: [Talos Linux](https://www.talos.dev/) and [Kubespray](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubespray). In most cases, people will pick between these two if they are seriously setting up something.

I really liked Talos Linux. It's clean, elegant, secure, and the architecture is very beautiful. But pretty quickly I realised that it's not a good match for what I want. The main philosophy of Talos Linux is that the only thing running on your machines should be Kubernetes. You can't even SSH into it. You can't install anything else or run anything else. This is fine if you just want to run Kubernetes and Kubernetes-native applications. But in my case, I want to run also other things like WireGuard or Tailscale relay node maybe, some other tools that are not part of Kubernetes.

So I want to have a normal operating system that can run Kubernetes and also
something else. That's why Talos OS, even if it's beautiful and secure and well
made, is not a good match for me.

Then I looked at Kubespray. Kubespray looked interesting because it's an
official Kubernetes project. It's open source, has more than 15,000 stars on
GitHub, and been around for many years. There are lots of issues and examples.
But the main thing that made me really want to try it was how simple it is and
how flexible. You don't need anything special. Just any popular Linux
distribution with SSH access and a user that can sudo without password. That's
it. Doesn't matter if you have one or hundred machines. Kubespray will install
Kubernetes for you.

So I was pretty sure I wanted to try Kubespray and I started looking at the
documentation and YouTube and GitHub and so on. And then I realised something
that became the main reason I want to write this blog. The documentation is a
bit messy. It's not very modern. There is no proper quickstart. It's not very
beginner friendly. It's not bad if you already know how it works, but it's
really hard if you are new. That's why I decided to document everything. I just
want to make it easier for someone else to go through what I'm doing.

Another reason why I chose Kubespray is because most videos on YouTube show only
the first step. They show how to install it on three VMs and how to do kubectl
get pods, and that's it. They don't show any workloads or interesting use cases.
The only video that looked real was from one guy, Farhad. He installed Kubespray
on VirtualBox, showed his terminal, fixed problems, and got it working. That was
very helpful and made me more sure that I want to try Kubespray.